In this video,
we're going to look
at Excel's VLOOKUP function,
and how it can be used
to categorize data.
This is not the most typical
use of this function,
but it is exactly what
it was designed to do,
and it does it very efficiently.
Coming back to our scenario,
Zara has convinced
the supplier to
simplify their late
charge penalties.
So they're now going
to be the same
for Melbourne and Sydney,
and instead they're going to
be charged on a series of
block rates depending on
how overdue the invoice is.
So Zara's noted them
in the workbook,
and you'll see 1-4 days
gets charged at $2.25,
whereas 5-9 days will
be charged at $5.50.
So she now needs
a new calculation
that will look up the
appropriate penalty.
In the previous video,
we saw how we could solve this
problem using a nested IF.
We would however need four IFs.
This would create a very complex
and inefficient formula.
The clue is in the language.
We're not saying if
it's this do that.
We're actually saying look
up the appropriate penalty,
and where that's the case,
you're better off using
a LOOKUP function.
One of the most widely
used LOOKUP functions
is the VLOOKUP,
and it is perfectly suited
to this type of problem.
It does have quite a
few arguments though.
So we're going to
break it down with
a very simple analogy.
What does the VLOOKUP do?
Well, imagine that you
have somebody's name,
but you need their
telephone number.
You will go to the
telephone directory,
you will find their name,
and then you'll be able to
get their telephone number.
That process of looking it up,
the VLOOKUP automates it.
So when we use the VLOOKUP,
the first argument it's going to
ask for is a LOOKUP value.
That's the piece
of information you
know, the person's name.
The second argument is
where you're going to
go and look it up, the
telephone directory.
The third argument says,
okay, when you find the match,
if there's more than one piece
of corresponding information,
which one do you
want to get back?
So if there was a telephone
number and an address,
we need to specify
which one we wanted.
Finally, we have the option to
choose whether we want
to do a range LOOKUP,
that's looking in within a
range or an exact match.
In this first example,
we're going to be
doing a range LOOKUP
because we're not trying
to find an exact value.
We're trying to find
something between
1-5 or between 5-10, for example.
Let's see how it works.
So clicking back into O5,
I'm going to type "=" and "vl".
Now, the "v" is for vertical.
So you can only use
the VLOOKUP if your
look up data is
organized vertically.
If it isn't, you'll
have to use HLOOKUP.
Now I'm going to press
tab and my look value,
the thing I know
is my overdue by.
So I'm going to click on
to that and type comma.
My LOOKUP table is my
new penalties table,
and I'm going to
select the whole table
but not the heading.
Now really important, we
haven't named this range.
So I'm going to have
to press F4 to lock it
in place and make sure you
get both sets of dollars.
Now, I'm going to
type another comma.
The VLOOKUP is going
to always match
our LOOKUP value into
our first column of
our LOOKUP data.
But it's quite
possible there will be
multiple columns
within the table.
So we need to specify
which column has the
value we want get back.
In this case, it's the second
column in our LOOKUP array.
So we're going to type a two.
VLOOKUPs are by
default range LOOKUPs.
So if you're doing
a range LOOKUP,
you don't have to worry
about the last argument.
We can just close our
brackets and press enter,
and there are all of our
late charges corrected.
So the VLOOKUP function can
easily be used for
categorizing data.
This could be working out
which tax brackets somebody
fell into or grading
your student results.
The only thing to
bear in mind is that
your LOOKUP data must be
sequenced smallest to largest.
In the next video,
we're going to look at a more
typical use of the VLOOKUP,
which is when we need to
match data, so keep watching.